Good morning.
How are you?
I am going to be doing something that's really fun this morning.
Back by popular demands.
Remember when I interviewed Mike, Liz and Bola, and we had a brilliant time up here.
Some time ago now.
I'm going to be doing an interview in just a moment.
To glean some wisdom.
from multiple sources about today's topic.
Because we have been looking at the theme of the Lord's Prayer.
It has been and is incredible, isn't it?
Are you loving going deep and lingering in each line?
I know I am.
It's been fantastic hearing about God being our Father, about his name being hallowed and what that means, about his kingdom coming and his will being done on earth as it is in heaven.
Dave last week,
would give us our daily bread.
We had a guest speaker, Dave Boden.
If you haven't had a chance to listen, do, if you were here and you've had a listen or you listened at home, listen again.
Because I just was watching people writing as he was just speaking amazing nugget, brilliant truth, loads and loads of times and people couldn't really keep up.
So I didn't bother writing, but I do definitely need to listen again.
It was amazing and how we can be dependent on the new thing that God has for each day and not the stale things of yesterday.
And his talk of bread
was fantastic and got us all thinking about lovely French bread.
I know it was for me, and we've got communion later, but that will be little cubes of gluten-free, not quite the same.
But he still gives us our daily bread.
Now, right in the middle of the Lord's Prayer comes the line we know.
Forgive us our sins as we forgive those who sin against us.
Or forgive us our trespasses or whatever it is our wrongdoings.
And I thought it would be really good for us to just spend some time
listening to other people who've had loads of experience of journeying with people through the process of forgiveness.
It's a central theme in the Bible.
All the way through we see that forgiveness is the key and Israel in the Old Testament.
They're journeying with God.
They make some bad decisions.
They fall away from God.
They repent.
They're forgiven.
They're back into a time of blessing and then they fall away again.
They make some bad decisions and then they repent.
They're forgiven and the journey goes on and on.
We see Joseph giving us a brilliant demonstration of what forgiveness looks like when his brothers return into Egypt and he's able to forgive them.
We see stories of Moses being frustrated, leading the people beautifully but going to get water the second time out of a rock and he
doesn't do it in the way that God tells him to do it.
And God said, because of that, you can't enter the promised land.
You see, what's that about?
Why can't he be forgiven for that little thing?
Why is he able to go into the promised land?
We know he is forgiven.
Ultimately, the transfiguration, he's there.
We know that he's forgiven eternally, but why would that take place?
Why was it?
He couldn't go into the promised land if God is so forgiving.
What's all that about?
There are so many questions.
In the Mosaic law, blood sacrifices were established for the forgiveness of sins, and ultimately Jesus would pay the ultimate blood sacrifice price for the forgiveness of sins.
We are forgiven.
We are able to live in relationship with God, our Father, because of the forgiveness that we get through the death and resurrection of Jesus.
That is why we are here today.
It has made all the difference.
And in the middle of this prayer, it says, forgive us our sins as we forgive those who sin against us.
And I've done a couple of messages on forgiveness before, so you could go back and have a look.
But it's interesting that in this particular part of the Lord's prayer, it says, forgive us our sins as we forgive those.
It's the one that's got the claws attached to it.
And actually, at the bottom of the Lord's prayer, it says, if you don't forgive those who sin against you, your father won't forgive you.
It's quite direct.
more direct than sometimes we like to imagine or appreciate.
So why is there this clause?
In the way that we've received forgiveness from God, we need to extend that forgiveness to others.
That's hard to do.
It's hard to do.
We are not God and He is.
And the journey of forgiveness and working out how to do it and what it looks like, that they're important questions for us as the church to wrestle with.
And so we're going to do that a little bit this morning.
And I would love to invite up to the platform, Bola Liz and Freddie slash Mike.
It's like question time.
Amazing.
Thank you guys.
I'll go here at the end.
You say question time or this is your life.
Give it that.
Don't worry, there's no red book.
Freddie, I'd love to do this is your life for you.
It'd be so good.
For those of you who have no idea what that means, that's anyone from my age or a year below me, if you're 51 or younger, that didn't mean anything that reference, but it was a good one for the oldies.
Let me introduce you to the amazing people who are sitting next to me up here on the platform.
This is Liz.
Liz has been part of the church family for decades.
She is a pillar in the life of the church.
She was one of our congregational pastors along with her husband Paul for many, many years.
She has headed up counseling in the church for many, many years and continues to do the same, even in your retirement from being employed.
You are still an absolute legend and we lean on you.
And so many of us have had our lives transformed because of what you do.
So thank you.
Mike Collins, real name Mike, I call him Freddie.
I will interchange between those two names accidentally on purpose.
But Mike's been being part of the worship team in this church, was part of the worship team for absolutely ages.
He was telling me the other day that when he joined the church,
the only person who's currently still part of the worship team, Linda Cloe, was the organist, and that was in 1975, Linda.
No, don't tell anyone.
Don't tell anyone that.
It's 50 years in one worship department.
That's pretty blooming good going.
But then Freddy came in, brought a rock guitar in, Peter Sawyer, you know, sort of rocks off his chair by Fred is playing, and they've been part of this team for absolutely ages, where Nicky and I joined the church in 2001.
Mike was there with Steve Crouch working hard into the worship.
And I remember it being handed over to us in 2003 so graciously.
And if you ever want to see how to pass the relay baton on well and cheer on the person who follows you brilliantly, Mike is an amazing example of that.
A trained counselor and you have just given your life into this church and into the lives of so many for so long.
So we just want to say thank you for that.
Now, Bala is one of, you obviously just saw him playing bass, but he is also one of the congregational pastors here in the church along with his wife Tina.
He's had pastoral roles in previous churches too.
He is a man who has a heart to serve and follow and love Jesus well and to love people the same.
If you have ever had any conversations with him, you will know that about him, but do get to know all three of these amazing people.
Let's give him one more hand and I'll give him a question.
OK, I'm going to start with a big question, a massive one about God's love and his forgiveness in your life.
I'll start with you, Liz.
How has the forgiveness of God changed your life?
Yeah, huge question.
I think if I didn't know that God had forgiven me, I would not have a relationship with him.
And if I didn't have a relationship with him, my life would be anything but what it is now.
It's the transformation, isn't it, from being in a relationship with our Lord and Heavenly Father and not being in a relationship?
You can't be in a relationship with anybody where there's unforgiveness.
And so if I didn't know that I was forgiven, I would not be able to call myself a child of the God.
That's great.
Thank you, Liz.
And that's a big sentence, isn't it?
That you can't be in relationship with this unforgiveness.
And we're going to be journeying through this and what this looks like.
That's a big statement.
Thank you.
Freddie, same question to you.
How has the love and forgiveness of God transformed your life?
When I first become a Christian, recognizing that, it gave my life focus at a certain purpose, I think, being forgiven.
I didn't fully understand that I needed to be forgiven.
because I've done nothing wrong, as it were.
I still remember being at Billy Graham meeting there, and in the mission, which was 66, and he was there with a 2,000-piece choir, and we're all sinners.
I switched off at that.
I've been invited, one of our college friends there, he found Jesus big time, and it was at the refractory there, having breakfast, and he said,
Would you come on?
Yes, I'll come on.
I'm open to all these new ideas.
And for being on, I switched off.
The irony was, come the early 80s, I'm outgoing very mistake knocking on doors, taking people to the Billy Graham Mission to England in 1984.
God has a sense of humor.
But it gave my life focus.
But I didn't fully understand coming to God what forgiveness actually was that I had sinned and I needed to
if you establish that relationship with God.
And that's what happens when you accept when you go to God and say, sorry, basically, and I'm forgiven.
So great joy.
Yeah, it's amazing.
Thanks for that story.
It's a good story.
And yes, when Dave was here last week and speaking, he said, if you rewrote
the Lord's Prayer in modern parlance, you may well sort of lose the forgiveness bit.
I don't need any forgiveness.
I don't do anything wrong.
And so it's interesting that that's where your journey began too.
You're a sinner.
No, I haven't done anything.
But it's getting the understanding and the revelation that has been transformational.
Bola, how about you?
I like Freddie, Mike.
I knew I was a really, really bad sinner.
I don't know some bad things, so I need that God in my life.
So, yeah.
So Jesus coming to my life and forgiving me, I knew that I needed God's forgiveness.
And yeah, that was where I started.
Yeah, so yeah.
Brilliant, thank you.
Now, when we moved into Chelmsford,
in 2001.
God was amazing and he orchestrated it that we would be in a semi-detached house attached to the current worship pastor and administrator here at the church.
We didn't know of this church anything about it but God knew and he had plans for us and they taught us a great deal about forgiveness.
and what forgiveness looked like.
But I personally, a bit like Freddy, he was a fronted.
I was a bit fronted sometimes because I felt it was a bit over the top the way they went about it.
You see, they taught us that if your kids would need to say to you, I'm sorry, first part, and you would say to them, I forgive you.
But that would happen in really small things.
Like you'd say sorry for something to Steve and he'd say, I forgive you.
And part of me is like, you don't need to say I forgive you.
Just say, it's all right.
It's okay.
But I think that what we do very naturally is we say, oh, it's okay.
When actually it isn't okay.
What's happened may not be okay.
Some of the things you may have forgiven people for in your life or you may need to forgive them for.
They're not okay.
And so for us to learn to say, I forgive you is actually a really powerful thing to do because it says it's not okay, but I still forgive you.
And I remember,
I used to watch this version of Cinderella.
It's a very butch thing to do.
It's called the slipper and the rose.
a marvellous musical version, you'll be hard pressed to find it if it's ever downloadable, watch it.
But anyway, in the end, Cinderella is so overjoyed that her life has been turned around, that she goes up to her stepmom and she says, and in my happiness, I forgive you all.
And this stepmom says, forgive me, how dare she forgive me.
And sometimes we can be like that too.
If we say to somebody, I forgive you, they can be like,
You don't just say, you forgive me.
Don't take it too far.
Who are you to forgive me?
There's so much stuff that goes on and we can get so messed up in the middle of forgiveness.
So here is a lovely question.
Here we go.
In the Lord's Prayer, we're clearly commanded to forgive others and that can be difficult.
What does forgiveness look like in practice beyond saying, I forgive you?
How do we actually forgive?
What's this process look like?
Okay.
So I know
When you forgive somebody, it's not saying what they did was okay.
And it's not even saying, we are now okay, you and I are now okay.
It's not like that with God, but with each other.
It's like, what I'm doing when I forgive you is I am no longer seeing you through that lens.
I'm no longer seeing you through that filter.
So I'm choosing to see you outside of whatever it is that you did to me.
Doesn't mean
I like you.
I want to be in relationship with you.
But I am no longer going to judge you through what you did to me.
So that's what it looks like.
How we do it is an internal thing of choosing to not see them as the person who did X.
But it's also working through the levels at which they've
hurt you so if somebody's done something that's caused you to feel rejected it's not just that you've been rejected it's that that speaks to you about I'm I don't have worth I don't have value I I am less and and you have to forgive them for those things that have been laid on you because of their action so it's it's unpacking which is what a lot the counseling is about it's unpacking all of the
ramifications of whatever it was that happened, and forgiving each of those things.
And one of the things in the counseling that I used to encourage people to do was to write, not to send, but to write a letter.
And in it to say, when you did X, it made me feel like this, but I choose to forgive you, so that you are actually looking at all of the consequences of whatever that action was.
That's amazing.
That's really useful, isn't it?
I think already, I need to be getting all these questions over this clip out to life groups.
People need to discuss this further, have a chat through it, because that was really good, a great answer.
Thank you.
It actually impacts us more than the event itself.
It's all the things it triggers in us and unlocks in us.
And I think the big thing about forgiveness is that we gain from it.
It doesn't really matter to you whether I forgive you or not.
You're not unless you're holding something.
It's what it releases for me that is the thing.
That's great.
Thank you.
Mike, same question to you.
How do we do this forgiveness thing?
I remember years ago, when I was working at a big chemical pharmaceutical company, saying to a champion in other departments, I'm sorry, I said that.
And it was amazing, actually, transformation in the relationship.
In those big companies, they have multidisciplinary meetings used to have departments, a lot of rivalry between departments.
I was in the project, and he was in the building department.
I even forget what it was, but it made amazing difference to our relationship.
And because I forget what I said, but so that's sort of one instance.
But the other thing that occurs to me is that forgiveness is not just a one-time thing.
What about those people in relationship that you see daily?
Maybe at home, maybe at work.
What do you do?
So even if you say, well, I'm sorry, I did that.
Will you forgive me?
On the one hand, on the other hand, in your mind.
I mean, what if the person doesn't know they've upset you?
You know, I'm waiting for you to say sorry, no.
So, but, as we were saying, it's internal.
What if somebody doesn't say sorry?
Should we still forgive them?
Yes, because in our own mind, there's some resentment there, some hurt, that is there, some offence.
I still remember your thing about forgiveness and offence, lagging up a big piece of garden fence with you, because it actually disables you, you're lagging this thing about with you.
So for your own benefit, you need to clear that.
I think one of the roots to this is not forgetting that Jews come on is to love your neighbor as yourself.
So that overrides this.
And so is that next day, same person, this forgiving process is a continuous in this situation, I think.
You've decided you set the direction to forgive that person, but you may have to carry on forgiving
Each day are fresh, as you see them.
Very useful.
Thank you.
Yeah, forgiveness.
So the question was, how do we forgive?
Well, how do we forgive?
Forgiveness can be really, really difficult to actually give.
And I'll be
a little bit vulnerable here.
Some years ago, I lost my dad, right?
And what happened, my family situation is actually quite complicated.
And in the process of having my dad buried under funeral, lots of things were said about me, really bad things.
I got betrayed by really close people to me.
And it was really, really painful.
However, and every time I thought about those people, you know, I would have those incidences or those things kind of like playing in my mind.
And like Liz said, I had to make a choice to forgive because those people were living their lives on their own, not even caring about me or whatever.
Or I found out that.
I wasn't able to pray as I needed to.
And, you know, so many other things were happening.
So, forgiveness actually takes the involvement of God.
It causes, I believe, that it's actually spiritual.
You need God's help to forgive sometimes.
So, I asked God, how do I let go of this heart?
And God told me, kind of like, I felt that.
I should pray for them.
Any time those thoughts played in my mind, I needed to pray for them.
And that's what I started doing.
So when the thoughts came in my mind, I would just pray for them.
And slowly, the hearts, every time I pray for them, the heart will subside.
So that's the way I've actually dealt with having to give forgiveness.
It is a choice.
And I'll tell us a story quickly.
because of Time Boss.
I don't know if you've ever heard of a person called Kori Temboom.
Yeah, a lot of us have heard her story.
She and her family, they were in, this happened during the Second World War.
And they used to give refuge to Jews from the Nazi.
And anyway, long story short,
they were betrayed by some people.
And then Nazis basically took them to the concentration camp and she lost her dad, she lost her sister in the concentration camp.
And when she was released after the war, she went to a church and she was talking about forgiveness.
And then on one occasion, one of the guards that actually been involved in, they would actually stand
God, so this guy basically, and his colleagues, they would stand and watch the ladies having their shower, and they're basically what they want involved in dishumanizing Corey and the rest of her people.
So they went through a lot of trauma, but then she saw this guy in church, and the guy
After she had delivered her message about forgiveness, this guy actually came to her and straight out his hand and said, your message really taught me.
And he had become a Christian.
And she said her hand actually froze.
She could not physically raise her hand to like take his hand because all those images kept playing on her mind.
And she had to rely on God to help her forgive.
And when she eventually did stretch out her hand, she said it was like a miracle took place.
She felt this overwhelming, like something go over her and reach out to this guy.
And she actually loved him, which I kind of like supernatural love.
So like Liz said, forgiveness is a choice.
But depending on the level of the heart, you can actually be hard to the extent that you actually need to rely on God to help you forgive.
Yeah.
That's an amazing answer.
Thank you.
I think it's always important when we talk about the topic of forgiveness that
Forgiveness is not the same thing as reconciliation.
Those two things aren't the same, but they can be banded around as though they're one and the same thing, but they really aren't.
And we always like to say this in Skylar Church, that we are a church that stands against domestic abuse in all of its forms.
And we know that when you read a Bible verse like, how many times should I forgive
My brother Peter says, you know, 70 times, no, 70 times, seven or whatever, you know, 490 times.
How many times am I supposed to do this?
And you can be banded around it.
It's completely biblical to not only forgive, but to put yourself back in harm's way.
We don't believe in that here.
We believe that forgiveness is key, but forgiveness and reconciliation and restored relationship are not the same thing.
And if you are struggling with that in any way and you'd love somebody to speak to Eddie and her team will be very happy.
to journey with you, to listen to you, to pray with you, and to help you from that situation.
Okay, so let's get on to that topic then.
What is the difference between forgiveness and reconciliation?
To the filter of whatever it is they did.
Reconciliation is a restored relationship, and although we have been reconciled to God when He forgave us, it's not necessarily wisdom to be
reconciled to somebody that's done something that's harmed you.
So it's two completely separate things.
It's the same as we talk about forgive and forget, but we cannot choose to forget, because the minute you think about forgetting something, you have remembered it.
So we cannot,
We cannot but forgive because that is what God has told us to do.
But he has not told us to reconcile with people who have damaged us or hurt us or done something to us that has left us in a worse position.
And we might talk about being, asking for forgiveness with a work colleague.
And there was a reconciliation there.
And that was great.
I mean, if there is a reconciliation, it's a wonderful thing.
But you have to be wise about where you reconcile, I think.
Yeah, just that.
It's a wisdom.
And it's they are nothing to do with each other.
You can't reconcile if you haven't forgiven.
But forgiveness does not necessarily mean you then reconcile.
Thank you.
A big example, I think, that really affected our lives.
Half of many years ago, late 70s, William Wales, went to Wales out to set up a company, a good friend of mine, old friend of mine, since I was 11, and invited me to join him.
He was a cabinet maker.
We had a factory in Wales that employed about seven people.
We sold a house in Enfield there.
I bought plants and equipment.
And I did everything else that Adrian didn't.
He was brilliant designing furniture and this sort of thing.
But he was sort of these days a bit manic depressive, you see.
So I thought I could manage that.
He's brilliant.
He had his ups and downs.
But got to a point where he just wanted me out of the company actually.
It was a rift coming up to Christmas of all times.
And I remember there was a row in the
in the workshop, as it were, and is walking around with a hammer.
You could really be, and his eyes glazed.
I can see them now.
So that was it, really.
So I thought, with a company's situation like that, you have agreements, joints and several.
And I could see us losing everything.
So I left and got the job.
Basically spent three or four months.
The situation was, we had, back in,
and Matthew, and that's of under five.
The van was pregnant with Hannah, and she was born in February.
And so that was that we went to our own way.
And that's how we came to Chelmsen here.
So we came here in August of that year.
So we've become Christians then a couple of years later.
So forgiveness, we were down in
Nothing happened, actually, apart from the fact that the company went, broke two years later.
Next thing I know, I've got the letter of my solicitor's, but that was that.
I thought it was a good acclaim, you think?
And he carried on, and basically he was better by himself.
He had a small holding up on the west coast, and he was mending instruments, basically, all this stuff.
Anyway, forgiveness.
That was a bit of background to get to where we're going.
And so we were at a Christian conference in those days called Royal Week, down in Wade Bridge.
I mean, those places, the tensions to get blown away.
Great, lovely time.
It's all new for us.
On the way back, we thought, well, we'll go up to Wales then, Utah, and just see them.
I was curious.
And the idea of forgiveness, reconciliation was in my mind, because we had no contact with them for 10 years.
And I can't remember the detail, but it was amicable.
And for me, that was the forgiveness aspect, as it were, but as to be reconciled, we never saw them again.
There was no genie set of... At some point, we can still be friends, can't we?
No.
This had broken a friendship.
Whilst I was reconciled to that fact,
And I know that reconciliation is about two people, like a period of estrangement coming together in a way.
I had in my mind forgiven him, and I'd been on Malice at all, but we lived 200 miles away.
I had a new life now.
The family had a new life.
I wasn't going to continue that.
So there is loss here, and I wasn't going to really establish that relationship.
Thank you.
And I don't know what happened to the rest of the family, much as I love them all, but there is...
There is a difference between forgiveness and reconciliation.
I'll keep it moving.
I just want to...
I've been thinking a lot recently, actually, about the forgiveness that we receive from God.
When we repent, when we say to Him, I'm sorry.
I turn from that way of living and I'm going to make a change.
I'm going to change this.
Our forgiveness from God is immediate.
It's immediate, it's unbelievable, it's incredible.
And that sometimes I think we can think therefore our sins against God don't have a consequence because we're forgiven.
But actually that isn't true.
Because if there are sins, if there are things we do wrong, this may be a bit complicated, but if there are things that we do wrong and they don't have a consequence, then that's injustice.
And God is a just God.
And so maybe the reason Moses couldn't go into the promised land is because
God is a just God and they needed to be a consequence for His action.
But for us living this side of the cross, it can be easy for us to think, well, therefore our sins, our shortcomings, whatever.
They don't have a consequence, but they do.
The difference is our consequence is laid on Jesus on the cross.
And that's why Paul can write, look, because we've been forgiven, does it mean we should go on sinning and go on sinning and go on sinning?
No, because there are still consequences for actions.
And that is that our actions towards God, our sins are shortcomings.
They go on to Jesus.
They continue to be placed on Jesus at the cross.
Sins always have a consequence, but thank God for Jesus.
And sometimes you hear people say, well, look, I've said, sorry, if you're going to forgive me, why does the consequence go on?
Because there is always a consequence of some degree.
And that's what the process of reconciliation looks like.
I read about,
the fact that God can see our hearts.
He knows if you're repentant immediately.
If you repent, he can see your heart.
He knows your repentance and he can offer that straight away.
We aren't God and we can't see somebody's heart.
And so for us, it takes time.
The forgiveness takes place, but we have to go on a journey of time to see if there has been a heart change that we can trust and therefore we can be restored in relationship.
It's different for us.
We are not called.
We can't do it straight away, but we're still called to do the best that we can and keep journeying this stuff through.
Okay, let's have a look at another question from these legends.
Let's go.
Okay, what does it look like for us?
I'm moving down all the way to eight, Liz.
Not that you've got a list there.
Ticking it off anyway.
Bola, I'm going to you first.
What does it look like in our lives when we choose not to forgive?
The choice not to forgive, first of all, is I would almost like call it a scene because God actually asks us to forgive.
Regardless of what the situation might be, there are so many scriptures in the Bible that actually God commands us to forgive.
And we're actually looking at the laws
the last prayer at the moment, and in there it tells us to forgive, because if we don't forgive, we more or less will not receive the forgiveness of God.
So we are actually harming ourselves if we don't forgive.
That's what it looks like.
The consequences boomerang back to us are not necessarily the person that we are holding a grudge against.
The other thing there is that when we don't forgive, we are almost like
opening the door to the devil because we've shot out God from, I mean, we're in disobedience more or less.
So what that then looks like, it's an open door for the devil to come in.
It brings in strife, it brings in health problems and so many things as a consequence.
I mean, if I was angry with somebody, I'll probably have
Every time I see that person, I probably have high blood pressure or something, you know, because I'm stressed.
And all of those things then have, you know, that health consequence, you know, I would be really upset every time I see that person, you know.
So that's what it looks like on forgiveness.
It's an open door for the devil to come in and have his way.
Fantastic answer.
Thank you.
Liz.
the health consequences can be more than just high blood pressure.
There's been quite a bit of research done about different illnesses that can be rooted in unforgiveness because our body is in stress all the time when we're in a situation of unforgiveness.
So as I said right at the beginning, when we forgive the person who gains most is us.
Not the person that we forgive.
They may never know that they've done anything to hurt us.
They may never know that
that we've forgiven them.
But it's the result in here.
And so unforgiveness is like having a burden.
It's like having a walking around with a sack on your back.
It's just a heaviness that comes.
So, yeah.
And it's not easy to forgive.
Sometimes we say we're sorry and it's very trite because what we're saying we're sorry for
is something that is fairly minimal.
But when we are wanting somebody, when we are wanting to offer forgiveness to somebody, we don't have to tell them that I was having a conversation with a friend on Friday.
And she said, she said, I was
when she was part of this church, she said, and this lady bounced up to me and said, I've forgiven you and they've bounced away again.
And she said, I've no idea what I did.
I still to this, they don't know what I've done, what I've forgiven them all.
So you don't always have to explain what it is and you don't always have to speak to the person who you are forgiven because it's something that you know internally that you need to do.
I can remember an incident years ago now where
I was having coffee with somebody, and they said something to me.
I can still picture exactly where I was.
They said something to me, and it was like I'd been stabbed in the back.
It was so painful.
And then the conversation sort of carried on, and I went away, and I spoke to Bev about it, and I said, I don't know what to do about this, because it's a person I need to be in relationship with.
But that was so, so painful.
And she said, you have to forgive them, and I looked at it, and I thought, yeah, yeah, okay.
be quite as direct as that.
So I had to work at it.
I had to work at choosing to forgive this person.
I have never told them what they did and I have never told them I've forgiven them because they had no idea that they had hurt me.
And God was really gracious because I actually cannot remember what it was that was done.
I think sometimes God does allow you to forget.
You can't choose to forget because sometimes God gives you that blessing and you cannot remember.
And that's what happened in that incident.
But it was hard to do.
Thank you, Liz.
Oh, Liz, by the way, I know somebody just as direct who would tell me what I needed to do.
Can't think of who that might be.
Anyway, if you could pass that on to Mike.
Always.
No need.
Yes.
Just to say, I agree, absolutely what Bola and Liz have just said.
But coming here this morning,
This notion, if you like righteous equilibrium, if you're not forgiving people, you sort of get a bit out of kilter with God as it were.
I go back to the, you know, that commandment to love the Lord God with all your heart, mind and soul and love your name as yourself.
And it's as though if there's something to have done, is it where you've,
a clumsy explanation, but you're sort of slightly out of kilter with God because we ask to be righteous before him and live a life of righteousness.
You know, his will, not mine.
And so that is a process.
And so it's sensing that really and seeking him, as Bola was saying, that only God can help you actually forgive sometimes, perhaps all the time.
It's great.
Thank you.
I'm going to throw a question in that's not on my list.
Everyone's favorite thing.
So you can grab the mic if you want it.
When we forgive each other and we journey with each other, if that's the right outcome towards reconciliation, what process, what job does time have in the whole process?
What do you think about time?
instantaneous versus how long things should take.
Have you got anything to add to people who are just trying to journey that through and just wondering about the process and where the time has a part to play?
So I think the further you get away from the incident, sometimes it lessens the pain of it and therefore is easier to forgive.
But also, of course, if you're
if you've got a distance in time, then the chances are you've got a distance in the relationship, the relationship has severed.
So there's that thing about don't go to sleep on your anger, you know, use at wedding services sometimes.
So because the person you're marrying is the person that you are having to live with and be in the same thing, you cannot afford for there to be a time lag between
the incident and the forgiveness because it just sours the relationship.
So I think it's a question of the closer the person is, the more in your life they are, the more important it is that the forgiveness happens quickly and it clears the deck.
But that, on the other hand, you've still got this whole problem of when something happens, you've got layers as to how it's impacted you.
But talking's a great thing, isn't it?
To be able to talk to somebody and say, when you did that, it really hurt me.
And I'm not really sure quite what the impact is.
But as far as I can, I choose to forgive you.
And I may need to come back and forgive you for something more when I've processed it.
Thank you, Liz, for taking that one off the cuff.
I'd love for us to look at how to apologise well, because I think that's really a key thing.
Of course, we can look at remorse versus repentance.
Sometimes we can be remorseful over our actions.
as opposed to repentance.
And repentant is like a heart change.
Remorseful feels, I wish I hadn't been caught.
So I'm remorseful that it took place because of this situation, as opposed to because I'm having my heart challenged.
So we can look at remorse and repentance in a little bit if we still have time.
But that gave you time to think about apologies.
How do we apologize well?
How should we do that?
Well, how's it got the mind cast up?
So it's...
it's taking responsibility for what we have done or said and not finding an excuse in that.
So I'm sorry I did that, but if you haven't done that, I wouldn't have, you know, it's actually, I am sorry for doing that, full stop.
I am not putting any blame on you for the fact that I have responded this way because that
then makes them the guilty party for instigating the fact that you now feel like this.
And the fact that I feel like this is because it's me.
So the same thing may have happened between you and somebody else and they didn't feel hurt by it.
But when it was you and me, it hurt.
And so it's money issue, not your issue.
So I think it's being plain.
I am sorry.
I shouldn't have said that.
I shouldn't have done that.
I choose to ask you to forgive me, but I'm not putting any blame on you for the fact that that's how I responded.
Great, great answer.
Thank you, Liz.
Thank you.
Yes, let me ask to be, I think, forgiven.
It's because you, the other aspect of this is you love that person and you still want to
look good in their sight, as it were, to be, and if you've upset them in some way, you've damaged the relationship.
So, as you say, it's about opening up to what you've done wrong and saying, an unconditional forgiveness, you know, please forgive me for doing that, you know.
And I think it comes out of love for the other person, because you could have another example where
It's somebody you met in the street.
But even then, you should...
They're still a neighbour.
I'm thinking this real as I'm talking, and you should still...
I'm sorry, I bumped into you.
Sorry, I knocked you off your bike.
That's brilliant.
Thank you very much.
I've been married for almost 22 years now, so I'm well versed in
making apologies, then.
Yeah, I know a lot of that.
But it helps, though, if you're married to one of the best people in the, I mean, I'm married to the best woman in the world.
She told me to say that.
I'm just joking, I'm just joking.
Just joking.
I hope I'm not gonna be doggos.
Okay, well,
making apologies, it means a 180 degree turnaround, you know, because if you're used to apologizing about something and then you go back to do it again, eventually even the person you're apologizing to, we know that this guy does, or this person really doesn't mean it, so
Apologizing actually means doing a turnaround and making a decision not to do it again.
And like Lee said, also making an apology means not pointing fingers to say, sorry, I did this, but I did this because you did that.
No.
Like she said, own it and
End of story, you know.
So that's fantastic.
Thank you.
I've got one more question for these guys before we come into a time of communion together.
And this is a really broad one.
It was the last one that I sent through to you.
What are some of the greatest lessons that you've learned about forgiveness over the years?
Keep sure it counts.
They don't let the sun go down on your anger.
Yeah, keeping short accounts, just living in a, I suppose it's a sort of state of grace.
So, again, this person was having coffee with this today on Friday.
She said, I think the Catholics have got something when it comes to confession, you know, that whole getting stuff off your chest thing and actually owning
Only new and responsibility.
There's something in that when I sit and have coffee.
I no longer, the poor not being around, I no longer have him as a sounding board.
So, you know, having good friends that I can actually say, I'm really struggling with this.
This has hurt me.
What am I going to do about it?
I think just having that sort of place where you can be safe and be open and honest about how you feel is a vital importance.
having somebody that you can lean into.
We've all got God, but we may not all have God, and we all have God available to us.
But it's not quite the same as having somebody put their arm around you and comfort you and help you to work process when you've been hurt or when you need to forgive.
That's great, thanks.
In James, it says that we should confess our sins to each other.
And having a culture where you can actually be open and honest with each other and talk through stuff is a massive part.
of being able to take ownership of the things that we need forgiveness for.
Freddie, any sort of big final hits from you?
I was talking to Val about this, actually, about, you know, why should I forgive them when they didn't know what they did wrong, as it were?
And Val talked about, well, it will affect your attitude towards them.
And so, as Liz says, it's always good to keep short accounts.
And that's all to say, really.
Fantastic.
I don't follow any final thoughts from you.
No, we are all done.
Shall we give our amazing panel a round of applause?
Thank you guys.
It's a big topic.
It's huge.
So many things we didn't get to discuss.
But there were so many things for us to discuss in our life group settings with our friends over a cup of coffee.
Let's just talk and work out what this stuff looks like.
Forgive us our sins as we forgive those who sin against us.
We're going to come into a time of communion now.
So I think the youth are going to be fetched, some of the older youth.
In just a moment, we can have an opportunity
on this Remembrance Sunday to pause and remember and reflect on Jesus.
Three stations set up, gluten-free bread is everywhere.
And at the right time, I'd love to invite us to leave our seats and to go, ones, twos, family groups, friendship groups, whoever you'd like to, to have communion together, to pause, to remember the sacrifice that Jesus paid for us so that we could have life.
In 1 Corinthians 11 it says this.
For I received from the Lord what I also passed on to you.
The Lord Jesus on the night he was betrayed took bread and when he had given thanks he broke it and said this is my body which is for you.
Do this in remembrance of me.
In the same way after supper he took the cup saying this cup is the new covenant in my blood.
Do this whenever you drink it in remembrance of me, for whenever you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes."
Now, when Jesus actually broke the bread in that last supper, he also mentioned forgiveness.
It says this in Matthew 26, while they were eating, Jesus took bread.
And when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to his disciples saying, take and eat,
This is my body.
Then he took the cup and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them saying, drink from it all of you.
This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured out for many for the forgiveness of sins.
So on this day when we're remembering how to forgive and how to apologize and what this journey looks like for us, let us remember above all that we are forgiven because of the broken body and the blood poured out of Jesus.
that has brought us life in all its fullness.
So why don't we, I'd like to invite the band back up.